>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, JANUARY 22: PRESIDENT
TRUMP REACTS TO YESTERDAY'S
MASSIVE PROTESTS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
THE LARGEST DEPLOYMENT OF
AMERICAN TROOPS IN EUROPE SINCE
THE END OF THE COLD WAR.
NEXT ON "PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT DONALD TRUMP WILLNOT
RELEASE HIS TAX RETURNS, AS
PROMISED DURING HIS CAMPAIGN.
TODAY, COUNSELOR TO THE
PRESIDENT KELLYANNE CONWAY SAID
MISTER TRUMP WOULD NOT BE MOVED
BY AN ONLINE PETITION TO MAKE
HIS RETURNS PUBLIC.
>> HE'S NOT GOING TO RELEASE HIS
TAX RETURNS.
WE LITIGATED THIS ALL THROUGH
THE ELECTION.
PEOPLE DIDN'T CARE.
PEOPLE VOTED FOR HIM.
LET ME MAKE THIS VERY CLEAR--
MOST AMERICANS ARE FOCUSED ON
WHAT THEIR TAX RETURNS WILL LOOK
LIKE WHILE PRESIDENT TRUMP IS IN
OFFICE, NOT WHAT HIS LOOK LIKE.
>> Stewart: MR. TRUMP HAD
PREVIOUSLY, REPEATEDLY ASSERTED
HEWOULDRELEASE HIS TAX RETURNS
ONCE AN IRS AUDIT OF THEM WAS
COMPLETE.
ON THE ADMINISTRATION'S SECOND
FULL DAY IN OFFICE, TODAY MISTER
TRUMP AND VICE PRESIDENT MIKE
PENCE SWORE IN SENIOR STAFFERS
AT THE WHITE HOUSE.
NONE REQUIRED SENATE
CONFIRMATION, AND HIS SON-IN-
LAW, JARED KUSHNER, WAS AMONG
THEM.
EARLIER, PRESIDENT TRUMP TOOK TO
TWITTER TO ADDRESS YESTERDAY'S
MASSIVE ANTI-TRUMP PROTESTS IN
CITIES LARGE AND SMALL IN ALL 50
STATES.
WASHINGTON, D.C. POLICE SAID
TODAY ITS CROWD ESTIMATE WAS
500,000 PEOPLE.
NEW YORK CITY'S MAYOR SAID THERE
WERE 400,000 PROTESTORS THERE.
SAYING HE WATCHED THE PROTESTS,
PRESIDENT TRUMP TWEETED TODAY
THAT HE WAS "UNDER THE
IMPRESSION WE JUST HAD AN
ELECTION.
WHY DIDN'T THESE PEOPLE VOTE?"
95 MINUTES LATER IN A MORE
CONCILIATORY TWEET, HE WROTE:
"PEACEFUL PROTESTS ARE A
HALLMARK OF OUR DEMOCRACY.
EVEN IF I DON'T ALWAYS AGREE, I
RECOGNIZE THE RIGHTS OF PEOPLE
TO EXPRESS THEIR VIEWS."
HIS CHIEF OF STAFF, REINCE
PRIEBUS, ADDRESSED THE PROTESTS
IN AN INTERVIEW ON "FOX NEWS."
>> PRESIDENT TRUMP WANTS TO BE
THE PRESIDENT OF ALL THE PEOPLE,
INCLUDING EVERY ONE OF THOSE
MARCHERS YESTERDAY, AND I THINK
OVER TIME MANY OF THOSE PEOPLE
WILL BE VERY PROUD OF THIS
PRESIDENT.
>> Stewart: TWO INFLUENTIAL
REPUBLICAN SENATORS, JOHN McCAIN
OF ARIZONA AND LINDSEY GRAHAM OF
SOUTH CAROLINA, SAID TODAY
THEY'LL VOTE FOR SECRETARY OF
STATE NOMINEE REX TILLERSON WHEN
THE SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS
COMMITTEE VOTES TOMORROW.
REPUBLICANS HAVE ONLY A ONE VOTE
MAJORITY ON THE COMMITTEE.
ALL BUT TWO TRUMP CABINET PICKS
ARE STILL PENDING IN THE SENATE.
TODAY SENATE DEMOCRATIC LEADER
CHUCK SCHUMER SAID HE'S LOOKING
AHEAD TO THE VACANCY ON THE
SUPREME COURT.
>> I'M HOPEFUL THAT MAYBE
PRESIDENT TRUMP MAY NOMINATE
SOMEONE WHO IS MAINSTREAM AND
COULD GET BIPARTISAN SUPPORT.
WE SHALL SEE, BUT IF THEY DON'T,
YES, WE WILL FIGHT IT TOOTH AND
NAIL, AS LONG AS WE HAVE TO.
>> Stewart: PRESIDENT TRUMP IS
CONSIDERING MOVING THE U.S.
EMBASSY IN ISRAEL FROM TEL AVIV
TO THE CAPITAL OF JERUSALEM-- A
CONTROVERSIAL MOVE, BECAUSE THE
CITY IS CONSIDERED SACRED BY
JEWS, MUSLIMS, AND CHRISTIANS.
AND BECAUSE PALESTINIANS
CONSIDER JERUSALEM THE CAPITAL
OF ANY FUTURE STATE.
WHITE HOUSE PRESS SECRETARY SEAN
SPICER SAID TODAY:"
WE ARE AT THE VERY BEGINNING
STAGES OF EVEN DISCUSSING THE
SUBJECT."
THE EMBASSY MOVE IS SOUGHT BY
CONSERVATIVE ISRAELI PRIME
MINISTER BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, WHO
SPOKE OVER THE PHONE WITH
PRESIDENT TRUMP TODAY.
NETANYAHU ALSO SUPPORTS BUILDING
MORE JEWISH HOMES IN MOSTLY ARAB
EAST JERUSALEM, DESPITE
PALESTINIAN OBJECTIONS.
TODAY, PERMITS WERE ISSUED FOR
566 HOMES IN THREE SETTLEMENTS.
THE PERMITS HAD BEEN ON HOLD
DURING THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION,
WHICH OPPOSED NEW SETTLEMENTS.
NETANYAHU SAID TODAY THE
CONSTRUCTION DOES NOT UNDERMINE
PROSPECTS FOR PEACE WITH
PALESTINIANS.
THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION HAS
APPARENTLY CARRIED OUT ITS FIRST
DRONE STRIKES ON TERRORIST
TARGETS OVERSEAS.
OFFICIALS IN YEMEN SAY THE
UNMANNED, MISSILE-CARRYING DRONE
STRUCK A VEHICLE WITH TWO
SUSPECTED AL-QAEDA OPERATIVES
YESTERDAY IN SOUTHERN YEMEN.
THERE IS NO OFFICIAL
CONFIRMATION FROM THE PENTAGON.
THE LATEST ROUND OF U.N. LED
PEACE TALKS TO STOP THE SIX-YEAR
CIVIL WAR IN SYRIA BEGIN
TOMORROW IN ASTANA, THE CAPITAL
OF KAZAKHSTAN.
SYRIAN REBEL GROUPS TODAY CALLED
ON RUSSIA TO HELP SECURE A NEW
CEASEFIRE.
RUSSIA IS THE MAIN BACKER OF
SYRIAN PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-
ASSAD.
THE TALKS ARE SPONSORED BY
RUSSIA, IRAN, AND TURKEY.
THE ONLY AMERICAN OFFICIAL
EXPECTED TO BE THERE IS THE U.S.
AMBASSADOR TO KAZAKHSTAN.
IN INDIA, RESCUE WORKERS TODAY
SEARCHED FOR SURVIVORS OF THE
COUNTRY'S LATEST RAILROAD
DISASTER.
POLICE SAY AT LEAST 36
PASSENGERS DIED AND 50 WERE
INJURED WHEN NINE COACHES OF A
TRAIN DERAILED IN SOUTHEAST
INDIA LAST NIGHT.
MANY PEOPLE TODAY WERE TRAPPED
IN THE WRECKAGE.
THE CAUSE OF THE ACCIDENT HAS
NOT BEEN DETERMINED.
JUST TWO MONTHS AGO, SOME 150
PEOPLE DIED IN A DERAILMENT IN
NORTHERN INDIA.
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH SPANISH
NEWSPAPER "EL PAIS" PUBLISHED
TODAY, POPE FRANCIS SAYS IT'S
TOO EARLY TO JUDGE PRESIDENT
TRUMP.
THE POPE SAID, "I THINK WE MUST
WAIT AND SEE....WE WILL SEE HOW
HE ACTS, WHAT HE DOES, AND THEN
I WILL HAVE AN OPINION."
THE POPE ALSO WARNED AGAINST
GROWING XENOPHOBIA AND POPULISM
IN EUROPE SAYING FEAR AND ALARM
CAN CREATE CONDITIONS FOR THE
RISE OF DICTATOR AND HE CITED
NAZI GERMANY AS AN EXAMPLE.
FRANCIS SAID: "HITLER DIDN'T
STEAL THE POWER, HIS PEOPLE
VOTED FOR HIM, AND THEN HE
DESTROYED HIS PEOPLE."
FOLLOWING LETHAL OVERNIGHT
STORMS, THE NATIONAL WEATHER
SERVICE TODAY ISSUED "HIGH RISK"
SEVERE WEATHER WARNINGS TODAY IN
PARTS OF GEORGIA, FLORIDA, AND
ALABAMA.
AT LEAST 11 PEOPLE DIED IN
SOUTHERN GEORGIA NEAR THE
FLORIDA STATE LINE.
SEVEN OF THEM WHEN AN APPARENT
TORNADO RIPPED THROUGH A MOBILE
HOME PARK.
GEORGIA GOVERNOR NATHAN DEAL
DECLARED A STATE OF EMERGENCY IN
SEVEN AFFECTED COUNTIES.
YESTERDAY, A TORNADO KILLED FOUR
PEOPLE IN MISSISSIPPI.
NATIVE AMERICAN COMMUNITIES HAVE
SEEN SIGNIFICANT DECREASES IN
RATES OF KIDNEY FAILURE.
LEARN WHY AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID TODAY HE
WILL RENEGOTIATE THE NORTH
AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
WHEN HE MEETS WITH THE LEADERS
OF CANADA AND MEXICO.
MEXICAN PRESIDENT WILL BE COMING
TO WASHINGTON ON JANUARY 31.
HE SAYS HE WANTS AN OPEN
DIALOGUE WITH MR. TRUMP, WHO'S
VOWED TO BUILD A WALL ALONG THE
U.S. MEXICO BORDER AND MAKE
MEXICO PAY FOR IT.
FOR MORE ANALYSIS OF THIS
MEETING I AM JOINED BY SKYPE
FROM MEXICO CITY BY "WASHINGTON
POST" REPORTER JOSH PARTLOW.
SO JOSH, WHAT IS THE BIGGEST
ISSUE FACING THE MEXICAN PEOPLE
AS THESE TWO PRESIDENTS MEET?
>> I THINK THE BIGGEST ISSUE
THAT WILL AFFECT MOST MEXICANS
IS THE TRADE ISSUE.
FIRST PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID HE'S
GOING TO SCRAP THE NORTH
AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT
AND FOR MEXICANS THAT IS A HUGE
DEAL.
>> IN THE PAST TWO DECADES HAVE
BEEN PRETTY EXTREME AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THEY DON'T WANT TO
LOSE.
I THINK THE WALL WHILE IT MAY
HAVE A MORE SYMBOLIC
OR-- SYMBOLIC IMPACT, THE TRADE
ISSUES ARE REALLY THE ONES THAT
STRIKE FEAR INTO THE HEART OF.
>> LET'S TALK ABOUT THAT MEXICAN
WALL THAT MR. TRUMP SAYS HE'S
GOING TO BUILD AND CLAIMS HE IS
GOING TO GET MEXICAN PAY FOR IT.
WHERE HAS THE MEXICAN PRESIDENT
COME DOWN ON THIS.
>> THEY HAVE BEEN CLEAR ALL
ALONG THEY ARE NOT GOING TO PAY
FOR THE WALL.
THAT IS ONE THING THEY HAVE BEEN
CONSISTENT WITH.
THE MEXICAN GOVERNMENT SAID THAT
OVER AND OVER THAT MEXICAN
PRESIDENT NEATO SAID SO
INCLUDING JUST A COUPLE OF DAYS
AGO.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT I
DON'T THINK AT LEAST-- I DON'T
THINK THAT IS GOING TO CHANGE.
>> PENA NEATO'S APPROVAL RATING
HAS BEEN IN A DOWNWARD SPIRAL,
AT LEAST BY 12% IN ONE ACCOUNT.
HOW MUCH HAS THAT HAD TO DO WITH
HOW MUCH HE HAS HANDLED THINGS
AT HOME, AND HOW MUCH HAS THAT
BEEN HOW HE HAS HANDLED
MR. TRUMP THUS FAR?
>> HOW HE HAS HANDLED MR. TRUMP
HAS GIVEN HIS APPROVAL RATINGS
ANOTHER KICK DOWNWARDS.
HE HASN'T BEEN POPULAR HERE FOR
A COUPLE OF YEARS.
THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT OF
SCANDALS HERE IN MEXICO DURING
HIS ADMINISTRATION.
THE ECONOMY IS NOT DOING VERY
WELL.
AND HE'S NOT VERY POPULAR.
HE HAS NOT BEEN POPULAR FOR A
LONG TIME.
BUT THE TRUMP VISIT,
PARTICULARLY AUGUST, WAS A BIG
DEAL FOR A LOT OF MEXICANS.
PRESIDENT NEATO INVITED DONALD
TRUMP TO COME VISIT WHILE HE WAS
STILL A CANDIDATE.
AND THEY STOOD SIDE-BY-SIDE AND
IT WAS SEEN BY MANY HERE AS
SOMETHING THAT LEGITIMIZED
DONALD TRUMP'S CAMPAIGN, EVEN
AFTER TRUMP HAD SAID NUMEROUS
INSULTS AGAINST MEXICANS.
SO THAT WAS SEEN-- THAT WAS
SOMETHING THAT REALLY WAS
UNPOPULAR FOR A LOT OF MEXICANS.
>> MEXICO'S FOREIGN MINISTER
SAID THIS ABOUT MEXICO'S
POSITION IN THIS NEGOTIATION
ABOUT TRADE, THAT MEXICO WILL
NEGOTIATE WITH QUOTE GREAT
SELF-CONFIDENCE, WITHOUT FEAR
KNOWING THE ECONOMIC, SOCIAL,
AND POLITICAL IMPORTANCE THAT
MEXICO HAS FOR THE UNITED
STATES.
THAT FRAMING IS VERY DIFFERENT
THAN WHAT WE HAVE BEEN HEARING.
IS THERE TRUTH IN THAT, THAT WE
ARE SO INTERTWINED THAT MEXICO
CAN COME TO THESE TRADE
NEGOTIATIONS FROM A POWER, A
POSITION OF POWER IN SOME WAYS?
>> I THINK IT THERE IS
DEFINITELY TRUTH THAT THE TWO
ECONOMIES ARE EXTREMELY
INTERCONNECTED.
THERE IS SOMETHING LIKE $500
BILLION OF TRADE EACH YEAR BACK
AND FORTH BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES.
BUT YOU KNOW, IT'S ALSO CLEAR
THAT MEXICO IS THE WEAKER
PARTNER HERE.
AND THEY HAVE A LOT MORE TO LOSE
THAN THE UNITED STATES DOES.
I DON'T THINK THEY HAVE NO
LEVERAGE.
THEY CAN IMPOSE TARIFFS ON
AMERICAN GOODS, COMING TOO
MEXICO JUST TO SEE THE UNITED
STATES MEXICAN IMPORTS GOING TO
THE UNITED STATES.
>> JOINING US FROM MEXICO CITY,
JOSH PARTLOW FROM THE WASHINGTON
POST.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>>Stewart: THE AMERICAN-LED
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION, OR NATO- WAS
FORMED IN 1949 TO PROTECT EUROPE
FROM POTENTIAL MILITARY
AGGRESSION FROM THE RUSSIAN-LED
SOVIET UNION.
IT'S MOTTO-- AN ATTACK ON ONE
NATION IS AN ATTACK ON ALL.
WHEN THE SOVIET UNION
DISSOLVED, AND THE COLD WAR
ENDED IN THE EARLY 1990s, NATO
STAYED INTACT; THEN ITS
MEMBERSHIP EXPANDED INTO EASTERN
EUROPE TO INCLUDE 28 NATIONS.
GIVEN RUSSIA'S ANNEXATION OF THE
CRIMEAN PENINSULA IN UKRAINE
THREE YEARS AGO AND THE RHETORIC
OF RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR
PUTIN, THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
DECIDED TO SEND THOUSANDS OF
AMERICAN SOLDIERS TO EASTERN
EUROPE TO REINFORCE NATO.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY FOLLOWS THE
TROOPS PARTICIPATING IN THAT
SHOW OF FORCE TO RUSSIA.
>> Reporter: IN THE PORT CITY OF
BREMERHAVEN ON GERMANY'S NORTH
SEA COAST, APPROXIMATELY 4,000
AMERICAN TROOPS AND 2,500
VEHICLES BEGAN ARRIVING IN EARLY
JANUARY.
KNOWN AS THE IRON BRIGADE,
THEY'RE FROM THE ARMY'S 3rd
ARMORED BRIGADE COMBAT TEAM OF
THE 4th INFANTRY DIVISION, BASED
IN FORT CARSON, COLORADO.
THIS IS THE LARGEST DEPLOYMENT
OF U.S. FORCES IN EUROPE SINCE
THE END OF THE COLD WAR 25 YEARS
AGO.
IT'S PART OF THE EUROPEAN
REASSURANCE INITIATIVE AND
OPERATION ATLANTIC RESOLVE -- A
$3.5 BILLION DOLLAR EFFORT PAID
FOR BY THE UNITED STATES TO
REINFORCE NATO.
>> I AM VERY PROUD THAT WE'RE A
MEMBER OF NATO.
>> Reporter: AT THE START OF THE
DEPLOYMENT, ARMY MAJOR GENERAL
TIM McGUIRE JOKED BY RUSHING TO
MEET THE DEADLINE SET BY THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION, HIS UNITS
WEREN'T ABLE TO CHANGE THEIR
VEHICLE CAMOUFLAGE.
>> TO GET THEM HERE AS SCHEDULED
IN JANUARY, JUST DO NOT HAVE
TIME TO PAINT THEM GREEN.
>> Reporter: BUT THE ARMY IS
ANXIOUS TO DELIVER A SERIOUS
MESSAGE: TO DEMONSTRATE TO
ALLIES AND ADVERSARIES ALIKE THE
U.S. IS DETERMINED TO ASSIST
NATO IN DEFENDING EASTERN EUROPE
FROM POTENTIAL AGGRESSION FROM
RUSSIA.
>> THE COMBAT POWER HERE IS A
TANGIBLE SIGN OF THE CONTINUED
COMMITMENT OF THE UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA.
IT IS ONE THAT ENABLES US TO
WORK WITH OUR ALLIES AND SEND A
MESSAGE THAT WE REMAIN
COMMITTED.
>> YOU'VE GOT TANKS HERE.
>> Reporter: BRIGADE COMMANDER
COLONEL CHRISTOPHER NORRIE
DESCRIBES HIS UNIT AS "LETHAL."
>> SO WE'RE AN ARMORED BRIGADE
COMBAT TEAM.
SO AS PART OF THAT TEAM WE HAVE
TANKS, BRADLEYS, WE HAVE
INDIRECT FIRE SYSTEMS, PALADINS,
WE HAVE A WHOLE RANGE OF
VEHICLES THAT MAKE UP OUR TEAM
HERE.
YOU CAN SEE NOW, YOU'VE GOT ONE
SHIP HERE, ONE SHIP THERE, BOTH
OFFLOADING ALL OF OUR EQUIPMENT
IN PREPARATION FOR ONWARD
MOVEMENT.
>> Reporter: NORRIE'S TROOPS
SPENT THE PAST YEAR TRAINING FOR
THIS MISSION.
>> WHAT'S UP IRON STRONG!
>> Reporter: ALGENON LEWIS AND
THOMAS RODRIGUEZ ARE ARMY
MECHANICS.
>> THIS IS MY FIRST TIME IN
EUROPE, PRETTY EXCITED TO BE
HERE.
GOING TO MISS HOME, BUT IT'S
ALSO NICE TO BE HERE HELPING OUT
OUR NATO ALLIES.
>> Reporter: THESE SOLDIERS
CONCEDE OUTSIDE OF THEIR
FAMILIES FEW FOLKS BACK HOME MAY
KNOW ABOUT THEIR ASSIGNMENT.
>> PROBABLY NOT.
PROBABLY NOT, HONESTLY.
I DON'T THINK THEY DO.
>> I DON'T THINK A LOT OF THEM
KNOW WHAT NATO ACTUALLY DOES.
>> Reporter: UNDER NATO, THE
U.S., CANADA, AND 26 OTHER
NATIONS PLEDGE TO DEFEND EACH
OTHER IN CASE OF ATTACK.
IN 2014, RUSSIA ANNEXED CRIMEA
FROM UKRAINE, WHICH IS NOT A
NATO MEMBER.
BUT THAT SENT JITTERS ACROSS
EUROPE, ESPECIALLY IN THE FIVE
NATO COUNTRIES BORDERING RUSSIAN
TERRITORY, POLAND, FINLAND, AND
THE FORMER SOVIET REPUBLICS OF
ESTONIA, LATVIA, AND LITHUANIA.
AFTER INTERNATIONAL SANCTIONS
WERE IMPOSED ON RUSSIA, THEN-
PRESIDENT OBAMA PLEDGED TO BEEF
UP AMERICAN MILITARY PRESENCE IN
EUROPE WHICH HAD SHRUNK FROM ITS
COLD WAR LEVEL, OVER 300,000
TROOPS TO 120,000 IN 2000 AND
65,000 IN 2015.
SIX DAYS AFTER ARRIVING IN
GERMANY, COLONEL NORRIE'S
MILITARY CONVOY REACHED THE
FIRST OF THOSE NERVOUS BORDER
STATES, POLAND, WHERE U.S.
TROOPS WILL BEGIN THE FIRST OF
THEIR NINE MONTH ROTATIONS
PLANNED FOR THE NEXT SEVEN
YEARS.
THIS IS THE FIRST LARGE-SCALE
CONTINUOUS PRESENCE OF U.S.
TROOPS IN POLAND.
THIS ARMY VIDEO SHOWS THE
SYMBOLIC MOMENT A POLISH FLAG
WAS ADDED TO THE LEAD U.S.
VEHICLE.
COLONEL NORRIE WAS OFFICIALLY
WELCOMED BY POLISH MAJOR GENERAL
JAROSLAW MIKA.
>> IT IS IMPORTANT FOR SECURITY
NOT ONLY FOR POLAND, FOR EUROPE,
AND FOR ALL THE WORLD.
>> Reporter: WHY SHOULD THE U.S.
CARE ABOUT WHAT IS HAPPENING SO
FAR AWAY HERE IN POLAND?
>> COMMON COOPERATION, COMMON
TRAINING, AND ALL THESE THINGS
PROVIDE MORE SECURITY FOR ALL
COUNTRIES.
YOU HAVE TO BE PREPARED FOR A
WAR, YEAH?
>> Reporter: PREPARED FOR A WAR?
>> YOU WOULD LIKE TO AVOID ANY
WAR, BUT YOU HAVE TO DO A LOT OF
TRAINING TO BE PREPARED.
>> Reporter: TRAINING IS WHAT
THESE TROOPS WILL BE DOING.
THEIR BRADLEY FIGHTING VEHICLES
TRANSPORTED FROM BREMERHAVEN BY
TRAIN WERE POSITIONED IN THE
SNOWY FIELDS OF POLAND IN
TEMPERATURES CLOSE TO ZERO
DEGREES.
>> IT'S COLD!
IT'S BEAUTIFUL, THOUGH.
>> Reporter: SOME AMERICAN
TROOPS WILL REMAIN IN POLAND.
OTHERS WILL BE SENT FARTHER EAST
FOR TRAINING AND WAR EXERCISES
IN ESTONIA, LATVIA, LITHUANIA,
ROMANIA, BULGARIA, AND HUNGARY.
PRE-POSITIONING EQUIPMENT AND
AMMUNITION IN EASTERN EUROPE CAN
REDUCE THE TIME NEEDED FOR
ADDITIONAL TROOPS TO DEPLOY, IF
EVER NEEDED.
OTHER NATO MEMBERS LIKE THE
U.K., FRANCE, AND DENMARK, ARE
DEPLOYING MORE TROOPS TO EASTERN
EUROPE AS WELL.
MANY NATO MEMBER STATES ARE
BOOSTING THEIR MILITARY
SPENDING, BUT ONLY FIVE
COUNTRIES, INCLUDING THE U.S.,
THE U.K., AND POLAND, MEET THE
TARGET OF SPENDING TWO PERCENT
OF THEIR GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT
ON DEFENSE.
THE REST, INCLUDING FRANCE,
GERMANY, THE NETHERLANDS, AND
ITALY, SPEND LESS.
OVERALL, THE U.S. ACCOUNTS FOR
THREE-QUARTERS OF NATO'S
MILITARY EXPENDITURES.
IN A FORMAL CEREMONY IN THE
WESTERN POLISH CITY OF ZAGAN,
WHERE SOME OF THE NEW AMERICAN
TROOPS WILL BE BASED, POLAND'S
PRIME MINISTER AND DEFENSE
MINISTER WELCOMED THE MILITARY
HELP, SAYING IT WOULD HELP
ENSURE FREEDOM, INDEPENDENCE,
AND PEACE.
WHILE OPERATION ATLANTIC RESOLVE
MIGHT REASSURE LEADERS IN
EASTERN EUROPE, IT IS ANGERING
RUSSIA, WHICH HAS REPEATEDLY
DENOUNCED THE BUILDUP ALONG ITS
BORDERS AS A PROVOCATION THAT
DEMANDS COUNTERMEASURES.
"WE CONSIDER THIS A THREAT TO
US," A KREMLIN SPOKESMAN SAID AS
THE TROOPS ARRIVED.
THE RUSSIAN MILITARY HAS BEEN
CONDUCTING MILITARY EXERCISES OF
ITS OWN AND LAST OCTOBER, NEAR
THE BORDERS OF POLAND AND
LITHUANIA, RUSSIA PLACED
MISSILES THAT COULD BE ARMED
WITH NUCLEAR WARHEADS AND REACH
THE GERMAN CAPITAL OF BERLIN.
RUSSIA HAS CALLED THIS BUILD UP
A PROVOCATION.
IS THIS A PROVOCATION?
>> WE ARE HERE TO DETER, AND A
PART OF THAT DETERRENCE IS
PUTTING THIS FORMATION TOGETHER
AS PART OF A REALLY
EXCEPTIONALLY STRONG TEAM OF
TEAMS.
I WOULD VIEW IT AS A DETERRENT,
AND IF I WAS LOOKING AT IT
THROUGH THE LENS OF A POTENTIAL
AGGRESSOR, I WOULD SAY IT'S AN
EXCEPTIONALLY CAPABLE DETERRENT.
>> Reporter: RUSSIA HAS EVEN
RECENTLY ALIGNED MISSILES THAT
ARE CAPABLE OF BEING MOUNTED
WITH NUCLEAR WARHEADS ALONG THE
BORDER.
WHAT ARE YOU DOING TO PREPARE
FOR THAT?
>> WE'VE TRAINED FOR EVERY
EVENTUALITY.
I MEAN, THE SOLDIERS THAT WE
HAVE IN THIS FORMATION, THE
CAPABILITY BY BATTALION HERE
THROUGHOUT THE BRIGADE, THEY'RE
READY FOR THE FULL RANGE OF ANY
KIND OF A THREAT.
OUR COMMITMENT TO OUR ALLIES IS
VERY, VERY IMPORTANT.
RIGHT NOW WE ARE CONTINUING TO
BUILD COMBAT POWER HERE IN
WESTERN POLAND TO RAPIDLY MASS
OUR FORMATION AND THEN
DEMONSTRATE THAT WE ARE READY TO
FIGHT.
>> Reporter: IN THE TOWNS AND
COUNTRYSIDE OF POLAND, WE FOUND
MIXED FEELINGS ABOUT WHAT
OPERATION ATLANTIC RESOLVE WOULD
MEAN. THIS POLISH TRUCK DRIVER
SAYS HE'S ALREADY COMFORTABLE
WITH THE AMERICAN PRESENCE.
AFTER ALL, POLAND IS USED TO
LESS FRIENDLY FOREIGN TROOPS
DATING BACK TO THE GERMANS WHO
INVADED IN WORLD WAR TWO OR THE
SOVIETS WHO OCCUPIED AND
OPPRESSED POLAND FOR DECADES
AFTER THAT.
>> DEUTSCHLAND, RUSKIES.
>> Reporter: "FIRST IT WAS THE
GERMANS, THEN THE RUSSIANS, AND
NOW THE AMERICANS ARE IN
POLAND," HE SAYS.
AND IS THAT OKAY?
IS THAT A GOOD THING?
>> "IT IS GOOD," HE SAYS. "WE
NEED PROTECTION."
>> Reporter: BUT OTHER POLES
WORRY THE DETERRENT FORCE MIGHT
TOO EASILY BE DRAWN INTO A
FIGHT.
>> THE TROOPS ARE FOR WAR.
THEY DIDN'T COME HERE TO FISH,
RIGHT?
>> Reporter: THIS MAN WORKS FOR
A SMALL COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY
IN ZAGAN.
>> MAYBE IT'S POLITICS?
I SUPPOSE IT'S POLITICS.
ORDINARY PEOPLE, WE ARE AFRAID.
WE ARE AFRAID.
>> Reporter: ANOTHER ELEMENT OF
UNCERTAINTY IN ALL OF THIS:
THESE AMERICAN TROOPS NOW HAVE A
NEW COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF,
PRESIDENT TRUMP, WHO HAS VOICED
SKEPTICISM ABOUT NATO AND HAS
SIGNALED HE WANTS CLOSER TIES
WITH RUSSIA.
IN AN INTERVIEW WITH BRITISH AND
GERMAN REPORTERS A FEW DAYS
BEFORE HIS INAUGURATION,
PRESIDENT TRUMP SAID "NATO IS
VERY IMPORTANT TO ME," BUT AGAIN
CALLED IT "OBSOLETE, BECAUSE IT
WASN'T TAKING CARE OF TERROR,"
AND SAID THAT "A LOT OF THESE
COUNTRIES AREN'T PAYING WHAT
THEY'RE SUPPOSED TO BE PAYING,
WHICH I THINK IS VERY UNFAIR."
AT A PRESS CONFERENCE BEFORE THE
TRUMP INAUGURATION, COLONEL
NORRIE WAS ASKED WHETHER HE
EXPECTS ORDERS TO TURN AROUND
AND GO HOME.
>> WE'VE BEEN TRAINING FOR THIS
OPERATION, FOR THIS MISSION FOR
A VERY, VERY LONG TIME. AND OUR
ARRIVAL HERE JUST DEMONSTRATES
HOW FULLY COMMITTED OUR NATION
AND OUR ARMY IS TO PROVIDING
THAT CREDIBLE DETERRENT FORCE
HERE AND ENABLING SECURITY IN A
VITAL PART OF THE WORLD.
>> Stewart: TO DISCUSS THE
SECURITY SITUATION IN EUROPE, I
AM JOINED FROM WARSAW BY PAUL
JONES, THE AMERICAN AMBASSADOR
TO POLAND.
HE'S A CAREER FOREIGN SERVICE
OFFICER APPOINTED BY PRESIDENT
OBAMA IN 2015 AND IS STAYING ON
WITH THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION.
AMBASSADOR, WHAT IS YOUR
REACTION TO THE KREMLIN
CALLING OPERATION ATLANTIC
RESOLVE A PROVOCATION AND,
QUOTE, A THREAT?
>> WELL, ALISON, YOU KNOW, THESE
DECISIONS HAVE BEEN TAKEN OVER A
COURSE OF TIME.
AND ESPECIALLY AFTER RUSSIAN'S
INVASION OF UKRAINE AND ITS
OCCUPATION OF UKRAINIAN
TERRITORY.
IT'S LEAD TO A DETERIORATION OF
THE SECURITY ENVIRONMENT HERE,
AND A LOT OF ANXIETY FROM SOME
OF OUR ALLIES, SO OUR MILITARY
TOGETHER WITH OUR ALLIED
MILITARIES TOOK SOME PRUDENT,
MADE SOME PRUDENT
RECOMMENDATIONS TO POLITICAL
LEADERSHIP.
AND THAT INCLUDES THIS
DEPLOYMENT OF A U.S. ARMORED
BRIGADE COMBAT TEAM FIRST TO
POLANDER AND THEN TO THE REGION.
>> AMBASSADOR, WHY COMMIT TROOPS
SPECIFICALLY TO POLAND?
>> WELL, POLAND IS REALLY THE
HUB OF THIS DEPLOYMENT.
SO THESE FORCES, ABOUT 3,500,
4,000 SOLDIERS WITH HEAVY ARMOR
WILL-- ARE DEPLOYING FROM POLAND
BECAUSE OF POLAND'S GEOGRAPHIC
LOCATION.
AND THEY WILL BE HEADQUARTERED
HERE IN POLAND.
BUT THEY WILL ALSO BE IN THE
BALTIC STATES, IN HUNDRED
BAR-- HUNGARY, IN ROMANIA AND
BULGARIA.
ALL OF THESE COUNTRIES HAVE
REQUESTED THIS SUPPORT.
>> WILL OTHER NATO MEMBERS
BORDERING RUSSIA ADD DETERRENT
FORCES?
>> YOU KNOW, THIS IS A BY
LATERAL DEPLOYMENT-- BILATERAL
DEPLOYMENT, THIS PARTICULAR
DEPLOYMENT HAPPENING RIGHT NOW.
LATER IN THE SPRING WE WILL HAVE
THE NATO CONTINGENTS COME IN,
A U.S. BATALLION WILL COME TO
POLAND, BRITISH, GERMAN AND
CANADIAN BAT ALL ONS WILL COME
TO THE BALTIC COUNTRIES BUT THIS
IS REALLY SUPPORTED BY ALL 28
ALLIES ONE WAY OR THE OTHER AND
EVEN WITHIN THIS REGION, POLAND,
FOR EXAMPLE, IS CONTRIBUTING TO
THE SECURITY OF OTHER COUNTRIES
ALONG THIS SIDE OF NATO BECAUSE
IT'S THE LARGEST COUNTRY AND THE
ONE WITH THE MOST CAPABLE
MILITARY ITSELF.
>> WE HAVE A NEW PRESIDENT IN
THE UNITED STATES.
ONE WHO HAS QUESTIONED THE
UNITED STATES ROLE WITHIN NATO.
IS THERE ANY CONCERN THERE THAT
THE U.S. TROOPS WILL BE ASKED TO
COME HOME TO RETURN HOME BY THE
TRUMP ADMINISTRATION?
>> WELL, I THINK THE GOVERNMENT
AND THE PRESIDENT OF POLAND ARE
LOOKING FORWARD TO HAVING A
DETAILED-- THERE HAS BEEN SOME
CONTACT ALREADY.
BUT THEY ARE LOOKING FORWARD TO
HAVING A DETAILED CONVERSATION
ABOUT THE SECURITY IN THIS
REGION AND ABOUT HOW THE UNITED
STATES IN POLAND, POLAND SEES
THE UNITED STATES AS ITS PRIMARY
STRATEGIC ALLY.
BUT THE WHOLE ALLIANCE CAN
ENSURE SECURITY IN THIS REGION.
>> ONE OF MR. TRUMP'S CRITICISMS
OF NATO IS THAT ALL THE MEMBER
NATIONS ARE SUPPOSED TO DEVOTE
2% TO THEIR GDP TO DEFENSE.
ONLY FIVE NATIONS TO DO, THE
UNITED STATES AND POLAND BEING
TWO OF THE FIVE.
IS IT-- IS THERE ANYTHING THAT
YOU AND OTHER DIPLOMATS CAN DO
TO CREATE MORE EQUITY IN THAT
SITUATION?
AND DOES IT EVER CAUSE TENSIONS
BETWEEN THE MEMBER NATIONS?
>> YOU KNOW, AS YOU SAY, POLAND
IS CONTRIBUTING ITS TWO PERCENT.
AND ACTUALLY IS INVOLVED IN A
BROADER MILITARY MODERNIZATION
PROGRAM WHICH INCLUDES VERY
SIGNIFICANT PURCHASES OF
MILITARY EQUIPMENT, AND WEAPONRY
FROM THE UNITED STATES AS PART
OF THAT.
SO BUT I THINK YOU SEE OVER ALL,
A GROWING SENSE WITHIN THE
ALLIANCE THAT WE HAVE TO PICK UP
THE PACE OF EVERY ALLY REACHING
THAT TWO PERCENT AND EVERY ALLY
CONTRIBUTING.
AND WE SEE THAT, REALLY, IN WHAT
IS HAPPENING IN THIS PART OF THE
ALLIANCE.
AND AS I SAY, POLAND IS A BIG
CONTRIBUTOR TO THAT.
AND FRANKLY, YOU KNOW, WANTS TO
BE PART OF NOT ONLY THE
CONTRIBUTIONS MILITARILY BUT THE
POLICY DISCUSSION GOING FORWARD
IN, YOU KNOW, WITH THE NEW
ADMINISTRATION IN WASHINGTON AND
ALSO IN THE FUTURE MEETINGS OF
THE ALLIANCE.
>> AMBASSADOR PAUL JOANS FROM
WARSAW, POLAND, THANK YOU FOR
BEING WITH US.
>> THANK YOU, IT'S BEEN A
PLEASURE.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, IN A TRAGIC
COINCIDENCE, SEPARATE CAR
ACCIDENTS IN THE DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC HAVE CLAIMED THE LIVES
OF TWO MAJOR LEAGUE BASEBALL
PLAYERS: KANSAS CITY ROYALS
PITCHER YORDANO VENTURA AND
RETIRED INFIELDER ANDY MARTE.
VENTURA, WHO POSSESSED A 100 MPH
FASTBALL, WAS ONLY 25 AND WON 38
GAMES IN HIS SHORT CAREER,
INCLUDING GAME TWO OF THE 2014
WORLD SERIES.
MARTE WAS 33 AND SPENT SEVEN
SEASONS IN THE MAJORS.
BOTH WERE PLAYING IN THE
DOMINICAN WINTER LEAGUE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
"PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND."
I'M ALISON STEWART.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.